Diet For Lowering Cholesterol
A diet for lowering cholesterol can not only help balance LDL and HDL levels, it can also provide numerous other benefits for your cardiovascular and overall health.

However, most people are unaware of the fact that only 20% of your body's cholesterol comes from your diet. A more significant 80% is actually manufactured in your liver. Therefore, even the best diets for high cholesterol can only have minimal effects on your total cholesterol levels.

So you can see that you have to manage the problem internally as well as through a diet for lowering cholesterol. First we'll start with guidelines for a healthy eating plan:

To lower cholesterol, choose lean meats, fish and chicken, and remove the skin whenever possible. Add peas and beans to your regimen...they are low in cholesterol and also contain a lot of fiber. Eat the egg whites instead of the yolks. The best diets for high cholesterol incorporate lowfat and nonfat dairy products. Stay away from trans and saturated fats, as found in margarines and snacks. Add fruits and vegetables daily. Use garlic and extra virgin olive oil when you cook, they are both part of a healthy diet for lowering cholesterol.

Even if you do watch what you eat and follow the above tips religiously, you may still have a problem with high cholesterol...as we mention above, your liver is responsible for producing 80% of it after all!

There are two options for the most part if this is the case...prescription cholesterol lowering drugs, called statins, and natural cholesterol lowering supplements, like policosanol, guggulipid, green tea, beta sitosterol and fish oil.

Although statin medications can be helpful, unfortunately there are some very serious potential side effects to contend with. They also do very little to raise HDL (good cholesterol) and deplete your body's supply of an essential heart compound called coQ10.

For that reason, a better complement to a diet for lowering cholesterol is a natural cholesterol reducing product. Some of these nutrients are sold as separate supplements. But research shows that they can be most effective when they work together in one comprehensive formula.

The best diets for high cholesterol can help, but when the problem persists then it's sometimes necessary to take either medication or natural supplements.

Featured Cholesterol Lowering Supplement
Some members of our staff have been taking a special natural cholesterol lowering formula with vitamins, minerals and herbal extracts to help lower LDL cholesterol levels as well as decrease triglycerides (fats) and promote overall heart health.

The ingredients of this special formula have been shown to be much safer than the statin medications prescribed by many doctors. Some of the ingredients have actually outperformed statin medications in clinical trials.

Take a look at this natural cholesterol lowering formula and find out how it can help significantly lower your cholesterol levels as well as promote overall heart health.
